Generalizing VLSI Flows docs (#718)
ucb-bar/chipyard: docs/VLSI/Basic-Flow.rst

.. _hammer_basic_flow:

Using Hammer To Place and Route a Custom Block
=================================================

.. IMPORTANT:: In order to use the Hammer VLSI flow, you need access to Hammer tools and technology plugins. You can obtain these by emailing hammer-plugins-access@lists.berkeley.edu with a request for which plugin(s) you would like access to. 

Initialize the Hammer Plug-ins
----------------------------------
In the Chipyard root, run:

.. code-block:: shell

    ./scripts/init-vlsi.sh <tech-plugin-name>
    

> This will pull the Hammer & CAD tool plugin submodules, assuming the technology plugins are available on github.

Reviewer: The tech plugin doesn't have to be in github. If it's not one of the default plugins in Hammer (asap7, nangate45 <- you need to add this to the vlsi Makefile), then it needs to be added as a submodule in the `vlsi/` folder first before you run the `init-vlsi.sh` script.

Reviewer: Also I'm a bit confused about where this fits into the existing docs.

Author: I'm not sure I understand this comment. I know that the tech plugin doesn't have to be in github. That's the reason the following lines explain how to clone a private tech plug-in.

Why does the submodule need to be added before `init-vlsi.sh`. The script only initializes the submodules (rescursively). If you're cloning the submodule independently it will already be initialized, wouldn't it? And AFAIK, tech-plugins don't include submodules within them

Reviewer: Don't you need to register the submodule by doing a `git submodule add` first?

By default, the MacroCopmiler will attempt to map memories into the SRAM options within the Hammer technology plugin. However, if you are wokring with a new process technology are prefer to work with flipflop arrays, you can configure the MacroCompiler using the ``MACROCOMPILER_MODE`` make variable. For example, the ASAP7 process technology does not have associated SRAMs, and therefore the ASAP7 Hammer tutorial (:ref:`tutorial`) uses the ``MACROCOMPILER_MODE='--mode synflops'`` option.

We call the ``make buildfile`` command while also specifying the name of the process technology we are working with (same ``tech_name`` for the configuration files and plugin name) and the configuration files we created. Note, in the ASAP7 tutorial ((:ref:`tutorial`)) these configuration files are merged into a single file called ``example-asap7.yml``.

Hence, if we want to monolitically place and route the entire SoC, the relevant command would be
.. code-block:: shell

    make buildfile CONFIG=<chipyard_config_name> tech_name=<tech_name> INPUT_CONFS="example-design.yml example-tools.yml example-tech.yml"

> In a more typical scenario of working on a single module, for example the Gemmini accelerator within the GemminiRocketConfig Chipyard SoC configuration, the relevant command would be

Author: I have a whole section further down I want to write about hierarchical support. But I don't know what to write in it....

Place-and-route is requires more design details in contrast to synthesis. For example, place-and-route requires some basic floorplanning constraints. The default ``example-design.yml`` configuration file template allows the tool (specifically, the Cadence Innovus tool) to use it's automatic floorplanning capability within the top level of the design (``ChipTop``). However, if we choose to place-and-route a specific block which is not the SoC top level, we need to change the top-level path name to match the ``VLSI_TOP`` make parameter we are using.

Hence, if we want to monolitically place-and-route the entire SoC with the default tech plug-in parameters for power-straps and corners, the relevant command would be
.. code-block:: shell

    make par CONFIG=<chipyard_config_name> tech_name=<tech_name> INPUT_CONFS="example-design.yml example-tools.yml example-tech.yml"

In a more typical scenario of working on a single module, for example the Gemmini accelerator within the GemminiRocketConfig Chipyard SoC configuration,

.. code-block:: shell

>   vlsi.inputs.placement_constraints:

Reviewer 2: I think you should add a sentence about how the width and height here could vary a lot based on the block you are building (is 300x300 even right for gemmini? I thought it was bigger).

Also this is a hammer comment but I think we might be able to support a different mode for this that is even more automatic. But that would need some manual reading, so its probably best just to be noted as an issue (in hammer).

    - path: "Gemmini"
      type: toplevel
      x: 0
      y: 0
      width: 300
      height: 300
      margins:
        left: 0
        right: 0
        top: 0
        bottom: 0

The relevant ``make`` command would then be
.. code-block:: shell

    make par CONFIG=GemminiRocketConfig VLSI_TOP=Gemmini tech_name=tsmintel3 INPUT_CONFS="example-design.yml example-tools.yml example-tech.yml"

Place-and-route generally requires more fine-grained input specifications regarding power nets, clock nets, pin assignments and floorplanning. While the template configuration files provide defaults for automatic tool defaults, these will usually result in very bad QoR, and therefore it is recommended to specify better-informed floorplans, pin assignments and power nets. For more information about cutomizing theses parameters, please refer to the :ref:`Customizing Your VLSI Flow in Hammer` sections or to the Hammer documentation. 

> Additionally, some Hammer process technology plugins do not provide sufficient default values for requires settings such as power nets and pin assignments (for example, ASAP7). In those cases, these contraint will need to be specified manually in the top-level configuration yml files, as is the case in the ``example-asap7.yml`` configuration file.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Additionally, some Hammer process technology plugins do not provide sufficient default values for requires settings such as power nets and pin assignments (for example, ASAP7). In those cases, these constraints will need to be specified manually in the top-level configuration yml files, as is the case in the ``example-asap7.yml`` configuration file.
```

Place-and-route tools are very sensitive to process technologes (significantly more sensitive than synthesis tools), and different process technologies may work only on specific tool versions. It is recommended to check what is the appropriate tool version for the specific process technology you are working with.

> .. Note:: If you edit the yml configuration files in between synthesis and place-and-route, the `make par` command will automatically re-run synthesis. If you would like to avoid that and are confident that your configuration file changes do not affect synthesis results, you may use the `make redo-par` instead.

Reviewer 2: I think this note should point to documentation on the hammer chipyard makefile integration (which I don't think exists), but would describe the ability to set some fancy makefile variables. Setting `INPUT_CONFS` makes all the yamls requirements for all actions, but the fancy variables let you set which yamls are necessary for which actions useful for things like changing floorplans or the like that only affect PnR.

Author: But that page doesn't exist

Reviewer 2: It seems I thought right. I can probably draft something with or for you offline.

Reviewer 3: Don't you need to add stuff to `HAMMER_EXTRA_ARGS` when running `redo-par` to use your updated ymls? Otherwise Hammer will just read cached results from `par-input.json` without regenerating them.

Power Estimation
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Signoff
^^^^^^^^^

During chip tapeout, you will need to perform sign-off check to make sure the generated GDSII can be fabricated as intended. This is done using dedicated signoff tools that perform design rule checking (DRC) and layout versus schematic (LVS) verification. 

> In most cases, placed-and-routed designs will not pass DRC and LVS on first attempts due to nuanced design rules and silent failures of the place-and-route tools. Passing DRC and LVS will often requires adding manual placement constraints to "force" the EDA tools into certain patterns. 

Reviewer 2: The PnR failures aren't silent usually(it reports many DRCs during routing in my experience). It's just that it wasn't able to fully solve the problem. Perhaps just call them "subtle failures"?

> If you have placed-and-routed a design with the goal of getting area and power estimates, DRC and LVS are not strictly neccessary and the results will likely be quite similar. If you are intending to tapeout and fabricate a chip, DRC and LVS are mandatory and will likely requires multiple-iterations of refining manual placement constraints.

Reviewer 2: I think we should mention two things here:
1) Having lots of DRC/LVS violations can be an indication of an unrealistic design and fixing it would significantly change area/power.
2) Having lots of DRC/LVS violations can slow down the PnR tool as it will try to fix each one several times. In my experience this can save several hours of runtime when moving from 10s of thousands of violations to a few hundred.

> Since signoff checks are required only for a complete chip tapeout, they are currently not fully automated in Hammer, and often require some additional manual inclusion of custom Makefiles associated with specific process technologies. However, the general steps from running signoff within Hammer (under the assumption of a fully automated tech plug-in) are Make commands similar to the previous steps.

Reviewer 2: Can you flip these two sentences? 
```
Generally with a mature tech plugin its like above. However a new tech plugin generally requires more work to get running DRC than PnR and vastly more than synth.
```

In order to run DRC, the relevant ``make`` command is ``make drc``. As in the previous stages, the make command should be accompanied by the relevant configuration Make variables:

.. code-block:: shell

    make drc CONFIG=GemminiRocketConfig VLSI_TOP=Gemmini tech_name=tsmintel3 INPUT_CONFS="example-design.yml example-tools.yml example-tech.yml"

> DRC does not emit autmated reports, but rather scripts that enable opening the DRC error database within the appropriate tool. These generated scripts can be called from ``./build/<config-name>/drc-rundir/generated-scripts/view_drc``.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
DRC does not emit easily audited reports, as the rule names violated can be quite esoteric. It is often more productive to use the rather scripts generated by hammer to open the DRC error database within the appropriate tool. These generated scripts can be called from ``./build/<config-name>/drc-rundir/generated-scripts/view_drc``.
```

In order to run LVS, the relevant ``make`` command is ``make lvs``. As in the previous stages, the make command should be accompanied by the relevant configuration Make variables:
 
.. code-block:: shell

    make lvs CONFIG=GemminiRocketConfig VLSI_TOP=Gemmini tech_name=tsmintel3 INPUT_CONFS="example-design.yml example-tools.yml example-tech.yml"

> LVS does not emit autmated reports, but rather scripts that enable opening the LVS error database within the appropriate tool. These generated scripts can be called from ``./build/<config-name>/lvs-rundir/generated-scripts/view_lvs``.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
LVS does not emit easily audited reports, as the violations are often cryptic when seen textually. As a result it is often more productive to visually see the LVS issues using the generated scripts that enable opening the LVS error database within the appropriate tool. These generated scripts can be called from ``./build/<config-name>/lvs-rundir/generated-scripts/view_lvs``.
```

Customizing Your VLSI Flow in Hammer
----------------------------------------

Advanced Environment Setup
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

If you have access to a shared LSF cluster and you would like Hammer to submit it's compute-intensive jobs to the LSF cluster rather than your login machine, you can add the following code segment to your ``env.yml`` file (completing the relevant values for the bsub binary path, the number of CPUs requested, and the requested LSF queue):

.. code-block:: shell

    #submit command (use LSF)
    vlsi.submit:
        command: "lsf"
        settings: [{"lsf": {
            "bsub_binary": "</path/to/bsub/binary/bsub>",
            "num_cpus": <N>,
            "queue": "<lsf_queu>",
            "extra_args": ["-R", "span[hosts=1]"]
            }
        }]
        settings_meta: "append"

Specifying a Custom Floorplan
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Composing a Hierarchical Design
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Customizing Generated Tcl Scripts
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> The ``example-vlsi`` python script is the Hammer entry script with placeholders for hooks. Hooks are additional snippets of python and TCL (via ``x.append()``) to extend the Hammer APIs. Hooks can be inserted using the ``make_pre/post/replacement_hook`` methods as shown in the ``example-vlsi`` entry script example. In this particular example, a list of hooks is paased in the ``get_extra_par_hooks`` function in the ``ExampleDriver`` class. Refer to the Hammer documentation on hooks for a detailed description of how these are injected into the VLSI flow.

Reviewer 2: Link to hammer docs on this topic?

For large designs, a monolithic VLSI flow may take the EDA tools a very long time to process and optimize, to the extent that it may not be feasable sometimes. 
Hammer supports a hierarchical physical design flow, which decomposes the design into several specified sub-components and runs the flow on each sub-components separetly. Hammer is then able to assemble these blocks together into a top-level design. This hierarchical approach speeds up the VLSI flow for large designs, especially designs in which there may me multiple instantiations of the same sub-components(since the sub-component can simply be replicated in the layout).
While hierarchical physical design can be performed in multiple ways (top-down, bottom-up, abutment etc.), Hammer currently supports only the bottom-up approach.
The bottom-up approach traverses a tree representing the hierarchy starting from the leaves and towards the direction of the root (the "top level"), and runs the physical design flow on each node of the hierarchy tree using the previously layed-out children nodes.
As nodes get closer to the root (or "top level") of the hierarchy, largers sections of the design get layed-out.

> The Hammer hierarchical flow relies on a manually-specified descrition of the desired heirarchy tree. The specification of the heirarchy tree is defined based on the instance names in the generated Verilog, which sometime make this specification challenging due to inconsisent instance names. Additionally, the specification of the heirarchy tree is intertwined with the manual specification of a floorplan for the design.

Reviewer 2: description
